What is the point of physics?
2012-06-06

I am often asked, by people I meet, ‘What do you do with yourself?’ To which I respond: ‘I study physics at University’. The inevitable follow up question is ‘What can a physics degree get you?’ The simple answer which I will get to in a moment is: You can become a physicist. And yes, they do exist in the real world, and not just as stereotypical geeks and villains in poorly scripted movies.

But I would first like to answer that question in a different way. Namely that study, as tedious as it may seem to some, can actually be a hobby for others. Throughout history much of mankind’s knowledge has come from somebody’s hobby. In fact, most fields of science started out as somebody’s hobby and Mathematics and Physics are perfect examples.

So when asked what I get out of studying physics I might reply with ‘What do you get out of playing a musical instrument?’, ‘What do you get out of riding a motorbike over dirt jumps?’, ‘What do you get out of painting a landscape?’ or even ‘What do you get out of spending time with your family?’. The answer given to all the questions in most cases is ‘It’s just fun and why do I need any other reason than that?’ If you can’t respect the fact that I may enjoy spending my time understanding the vast and fascinating universe that we all live in, then how do you expect me to respect your desire to hang out with friends on the weekend.

Now before moving on to the physicist as a career let’s take a look at what you learn during a physics degree. Throughout my three years of university I have learnt a lot of physics and mathematics, quite specific examples of various physical things in the world. In mathematics we learnt how to calculate probabilities of various hands in poker, how to work out the half-life of a radioactive element using simple differential calculus, how to work out the frequency of a block attached to a spring sliding back and forth on a table. In physics we calculated how far a rock might travel when shot out of a cannon at 45 degrees from the top of a tower, how much energy we would need to get a rocket off the earth, what is the shape of a power line hanging loosely between two poles. As the coursework became more advanced the examples got more abstract such as figuring out how much energy would be needed to excite an electron out of one of its orbitals in the Hydrogen atom.

All of these examples are probably not things I’m going to ever need to calculate again. The purpose of my education was not to learn and remember all of these little facts. The main thing I gained from my education was the ability to solve problems. I don’t dare count the number of strange problems I have solved in my time as a university student.

Perhaps I should better define what I mean by this. A problem is when we look at something and say ‘Why is it doing that?’, ‘Why won’t it do this?’, ‘What is it?’, ‘How can I achieve this?’. A problem is a very general thing. In physics and Mathematics we learn to solve problems by stepping back and thinking about what we already know and how it might help us. For example; can we draw a diagram and show the different forces that are affecting the thing at different times or can we write down an equation from elementary physics and then figure out what mathematics might be needed to solve it. It is a very amazing thing when you first realise we can figure out why an electron is behaving as it does even though nobody has ever even seen and nobody ever will see an electron.

This may not yet seem important but as society is moving forward socially, economically and technologically it is doing so by people solving the problems of the past. For this reason I’m sure a physics degree gives a person a skill that will be useful for a huge number of career choices.

Finally I’ll say a little bit about physicists. The obvious career path for somebody with a physics degree is to become a physicist. If you don’t believe they exist you can go to your nearest University and I bet you’ll be able to find at least a couple. Sometimes there is even an entire building just for physicists. Many of them may be doing research with the purpose of simply finding the answer to a question that they find personally interesting. Their career goals may be as simple as expanding the scientific knowledge of mankind. And hey, what’s wrong with that? We don’t tell Picasso or Mozart that they are wasting their time just because they never built anything useful or saved any lives. They are doing it for their enjoyment and the enjoyment of other people with similar interests.

Aside from all that we find that physics has actually saved lives and built incredibly useful things. Almost all of modern technology is based around physics that was discovered hundreds of years ago. The physicists often never imagined the applications their work would have, but it didn’t stop them pursuing their passion to explain the previously unknown phenomena of the universe. Quite simply, without physics, we wouldn’t have mobile phones, computers, televisions, airplanes, satellite navigation, cars and a huge number of other things that are used every day by nearly everyone in the world.

A nice example I usually like to mention is the modern computer. The creation of the tiny transistors that are used in a computer chip rely heavily on our understanding of quantum physics. Much of this knowledge we have had for several decades. Quantum physicists who discovered this stuff did it for the joy of understanding what was going on with very small things in the universe. In turn none of this physics would have ever been possible if it weren’t for mathematical knowledge from many decades before that. And again the mathematicians did it for the love of knowledge not for its applications.

I don’t expect any of you to now want to become a physicist, but I hope that the next time you meet a physicist you will have enough understanding to not accidentally imply that they are wasting their time. Even if you don’t understand, you should at least respect the right of someone to devote some of their time to unlocking the mysteries of this beautiful universe we have found ourselves in.

<iframe allowfullscreen="" frameborder="0" height="315" src="http://www.youtube.com/embed/buqtdpuZxvk" width="420"></iframe>
